In the previous video, we have done
creating a topology like this.
So here we have ubuntu server inside virtualbox.
This ubuntu server is connected to internet,
connected to router inside gns3, and
also connected to host os or our laptop.
If you remember, we also able to remote the ubuntu
server from our laptop using ssh. Let’s check it,
here, we are in the mac os terminal,
but this is the ubuntu prompt. This is means
that we remote the ubuntu server from our laptop.
This ubuntu server will used
to do network automation.
we will write a network automation
script here in the ubuntu server.
So we need to make sure that python
is installed in the ubuntu server.
Let’s type pyt and then tab. Here we
can see that we already have python3.
Let’s enter here, okay this is
python version 3.8.2. Let’s exit.
To write the python script, we have multiple
way. First, we can use text editor from ubuntu,
which is nano. Let’s try, nano and then
the file name, let’s say script1.py.
Okay we are in the nano text editor, let’s write
python script here, let’s say print hello python.
Print hello world, and others.
Save this, ctrl + x, y, enter. Let’s ls here,
here we can see that we have script1.py,
let’s run this script.
Python script1.py. here we can see that
we get hello python and hello world.
Another way, we can use sublime text.
Sublime text is a desktop text editor,
this is means that the sublime text is
running on host os, not in the guest os,
because the ubuntu server is cli, so we can
not install sublime in the ubuntu server.
So now the question is, how we
can edit the script on our laptop,
but the script will also
saved on the ubuntu server.
This is what we are going to learn
in this video, let’s just start.
To do that, we need to install
additional package in sublime text.
Here in the sublime text, type ctrl + shift + p.
Or if you use mac, you need to type command
+ shift + p. But in the windows or linux,
we need to type ctrl + shift + p.
Here let’s type install and then
choose install package control.
You can click here or just enter.
Wait for a minute. Okay here we get a message that
package control was successfully installed.
Ctrl + shift + p again, here let’s
choose package control: install package.
Here we can see some package that
we can install in sublime text.
Let’s search for sftp. This is the package
that we are going to install. Click here.
Okay here we get a message that
sftp is successfully installed.
Now let’s setup the sftp. First, we need
to open empty folder in the sublime.
File open, and here we can
choose the empty folder.
Right click here, here we have a choice
sftp or ftp. Choose map to remote.
Here we need to define the
information about ubuntu server.
So the host is the ip address of
ubuntu server, which is 192.168.56.2.
and then the username is ubuntu, and then
here for the password, let’s remove the slash.
This slash means comment. And then here
let’s type the password of ubuntu server.
I will change the password of ubuntu server first.
Let’s back to sublime text.
And type the password here.
And then remote path, this is
the path in the ubuntu server.
so later, the local path will be synchronize
to the path in the ubuntu server.
Let’s say I will synchronize to the
home directory in the ubuntu server.
Let’s type pwd here. The path is /home/ubuntu.
So here let’s put /home/ubuntu.
You can see the configuration here and change
some configuration that you want to change.
In this case, I want to change this configuration,
upload on save. This is means that the sublime
will upload the file to the ubuntu server
when we save the file. The default is
false, let’s change this become true.
We have done here, save this. Right
click here in the folder, sftp,
synchronize remote to local. This is means we
synchronize from the ubuntu server to our laptop.
Here we can see that we connect to
192.168.56.2 as ubuntu, wait for a minute.
Here we can see some file from ubuntu
server that will synchronized to our laptop.
Oh I am sorry, this is cancel when I
click here. Right click again, sftp,
and then synchronize remote to local
Here we can see some file that will
downloaded to our laptop.
But here we can see some file that we don’t need in our
laptop, .ssh/config, .ssh/known_hosts and others.
So in this case, I will choose no.
Here in the sftp configuration, we have
ignore regex. We can put file or directory
that we don’t want to synchronize here. In
this case, we want to ignore .ssh. save.
Let’s try to synchronize again. Here we can see
that .ssh is not downloaded anymore. Yes here.
Okay we have done, here we can
see that now we have script1.py,
this is the script that we write
in the ubuntu server before.
Let’s try to edit this,
Print hello java. Save this,
here we can just cancel it.
Back to the terminal,
ls, here we can see that we only have script1.py,
may be some of you have a question,
why when we synchronize in the sublime,
we get a lot of file?
This is because, file that started by dot is hidden file, to
see hidden file in ubuntu, we can use ls -a.
Okay here we can see many file that
started by dot, this is means hidden file.
Okay now let’s run script1.py,
here we can see that now we have hello java.
Remember that we add hello java
from our laptop in the sublime text.
So now when we edit from sublime text, the file
will be saved automatically on ubuntu server.
Let’s try to create new file from
sublime text. Let’s say script2.py,
write a python script here, let’s say print
hello java and then print hello python. Save.
Now let’s go to ubuntu, ls, here
we can see that we have script2.py,
let’s run this script, python script2.py.
Okay here we get hello java and hello python.
So now we can edit the script in the sublime text,
and the script will be automatically
saved in the ubuntu server.
I think enough for this video. In the
next video, we are going to learn
how to install package in python.
Thank you for watching and see you on the next video.